---
layout: post
title: "Stop playing Beethoven!"
description: post on Django Unchained
---

###  "Stop playing Beethoven!"

  
_Two notes: First, the movie under discussion is violent and profane; don't
see it unless you're comfortable with that. Second, **spoilers follow**, and I
wish the context clue of "it comes very late in the movie" were enough to tip
everyone off to that, but might as well follow
Internet&nbsp_place_holder;etiquette on this one._

  
There's a scene from Quentin Tarantino's _Django
Unchained_&nbsp_place_holder;that's sticking with me. It comes very late in
the movie. The plot to that point: King Schultz is a German bounty hunter
working in the American South. As a German, he finds slavery distasteful and
racism ridiculous, but he's an ironist rather than a radical. He's fond of
casually comparing the violence of his job, which he does with skill and
panache, with the violence of slavery. He and his ex-slave protege Django have
spent the middle third of the movie infiltrating a horrifically corrupt
plantation in order to buy and rescue Django's wife; their plot involves
pretending to be fully amoral slavers. Django, because of his great love,
plays his role fully; Schultz finds it increasingly difficult to keep his
poker face in the presence of cruelty. Eventually,&nbsp_place_holder;Schultz
and Django's scheme fails, and the pair is exposed.

  
So here's the scene: the furious plantation owner, Calvin Candie, has decided
to humiliate the intruders by terrifying them into a financially ruinous deal,
so that they'll escape with their lives and little else. While Candie draws up
the papers, Schultz stews in a sumptuous parlor. A harpist plays Fur Elise.
Schultz sees memories flash before him of the day's terrors. For the first
time in the film, he loses his composure, lurching angrily toward the harpist.
He can't abide this refinement and beauty in a place just outside of which
slaves can be murdered by dogs. "Stop playing Beethoven!"

  
Candie, noticing Schultz's outburst, first shrugs it off as the bitterness of
a man bested in intellectual combat. But it's not shame, it's moral contempt.
And when Candie understands this, he decides to complete the humiliation,
saying that the deal can't conclude without a handshake. He offers his hand,
so that Schultz must visibly signal accommodation with and hence submission to
a system of racism and slavery that now disturbs him to the core. And Schultz
has reached a point where he can no longer ironize his morality. He cannot
cross this line. Some things are more important than survival. Schultz shoots
Candie through the heart. For this he's quickly shot down by a henchman,
and... well, the movie is really Django's story, and I won't ruin any more of
it.

  
For those of us that thought the meta-concerns of _Inglorious
Basterds_&nbsp_place_holder;blurred out the moral realities required for a
consideration of Nazi Germany, this moment of moral clarity is a blessed
relief, and a challenge. Which hands are we shaking? And must we refuse?

  
The movie's not perfect. It's troubling how what is badass crowds out what is
good in so many American movies, and this line of thought applies to _Django
Unchained_. But it should also be known that Tarantino's taken the old trope
of the out-for-only-himself gunslinger's self-sacrificial awakening (see also:
Han Solo) and deployed it more than just convincingly, with the special help
of Christoph Waltz's acting. I can't get the scene out of my mind.